We present an approach to automatically synthesise recursive
predicates in Separation Logic (SL) from concrete data structure
instances using Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) techniques.
%
The main challenges to make such synthesis effective are (1)~making it
work without negative examples that are required in ILP but are
difficult to construct for heap-based structures in an automated
fashion, and (2)~to be capable of summarising not just the
\emph{shape} of a heap (\eg, it is a \emph{linked} list), but also the
\emph{properties} of the data it stores (\eg, it is a \emph{sorted}
linked list).
%
We tackle these challenges with a new predicate learning algorithm.
The key contributions of our work are (a)~the formulation of ILP-based
learning only using positive examples and (b)~an algorithm that
synthesises property-rich SL predicates from concrete \emph{memory
graphs} based on the positive-only learning.

We show that our framework can efficiently and correctly synthesise SL
predicates for structures that were beyond the reach of the
state-of-the-art tools, including those featuring non-trivial payload
constraints (\eg,~binary search trees) and nested recursion
(\eg,~$n$-ary trees).
%
We further extend the usability of our approach by a memory graph
generator that produces positive heap examples from programs. Finally,
we show how our approach facilitates deductive verification and
synthesis of correct-by-construction code.

